---
title: "Privacy policy"
date: 2019-01-19T23:34:28+01:00
draft: false
---
Status: August 1, 2019 

Privacy policy of the Felix Klement website

Felix Klement takes the concerns of data protection very seriously and collects, processes and uses your personal data exclusively in accordance with the principles described below and in compliance with the applicable data protection laws:


## Responsible authority
The entity responsible for operating Felix Klement's website (hereinafter referred to as the "Website") and for collecting, processing and using your personal data in accordance with applicable data protection laws is Felix Klement, Mittertorstr. 9, 84048 Mainburg, Germany.


## Cookies

This website uses cookies to facilitate the operation of the website and to improve its user-friendliness. Cookies are small alphanumeric text files that allow your computer to be recognized when you reopen the site. Most of the cookies used are so-called "session cookies" and are deleted when you close your browser. Some cookies are stored permanently on your computer. These "persistent cookies" allow the website to recognize your computer when you return to the site. Cookies are harmless, do not harm your computer and do not contain any viruses or malware. Nevertheless, you can deactivate the use of cookies in your browser. However, this can lead to some functions and applications of the website not working as usual and to their full extent.

## Web Analytics

This website uses Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google Inc. ("Google", <a href="https://www.google.com">www.google.com</a>)<br><br>
Google Analytics uses "cookies", which are text files placed on your computer, to help the website analyze how users use the site. The information generated by the cookie about your use of the website will generally be transmitted to and stored by Google on servers in the United States. It is possible that the local authorities can access this data. Your IP address will be shortened by Google within member states of the European Union or in other contracting states of the Agreement on the European Economic Area. In this way, we collect and store data anonymously and create pseudonymised user profiles from it. Only in exceptional cases is the full IP address transmitted to a Google server in the USA and shortened there. On behalf of the operator of this website, Google will use this information for the purpose of evaluating website usage, compiling reports on website activity and providing other services to website operators relating to website activity and internet usage. The IP address transmitted by your browser as part of Google Analytics is not combined with other data from Google. You can find further information on data protection at Google <a href="https://www.google.com/intl/de/policies/privacy/partners/">here</a>. You may refuse the use of cookies by selecting the appropriate settings on your browser, however please note that if you do this you may not be able to use the full functionality of this website.

## Data security

Your user data is protected during transmission to our servers by the use of SSL security procedures (Secure Socket Layer) in conjunction with 256-bit encryption. You can check the security of the connection using the information in the URL display of your browser. If the beginning of the address line changes from "http" to "https", there is a secure connection.

## Right to information, correction, blocking or deletion, etc.
According to the applicable data protection law, you have a right to free information about your stored data and, if necessary, a right to correction, blocking or deletion of this data.

If you have any further questions regarding data protection and the processing of your personal data, if you wish to obtain information or exercise your right to correction, blocking or deletion, or if you wish to revoke your consent, please contact us by e-mail at mail(at)felix-klement(dot)de. Of course you can also use the contact data given in the imprint or the contact forms provided on the website. Felix Klement processes and uses the information you provide exclusively for processing your request.

## Adjustments
Felix Klement reserves the right to amend these data protection provisions from time to time. We will inform you of any changes or additions in advance and, if necessary, obtain your consent to the changed processing or use of your personal data.